The new OnRobot 3FG15 electric three-finger gripper can simplify your end of arm tooling (EOAT) design by eliminating costly pneumatic controls. There is no FRL to connect, no manifold to mount, and no airlines to route. The 150mm stroke gripper was designed for machine tending applications that require precision and flexibility. “Our new 3FG15 three-finger gripper was developed as a response to existing pneumatic three-finger grippers that are bulkier and less flexible,” said OnRobot CEO Enrico Krog Iversen. “We have long defined the market for electric parallel grippers with the RG2 and RG6 series, and we look forward to addressing new market segments and applications with a new three-finger gripper that allows users to deploy applications faster, even with highly accurate, fixed positioning.” The 3FG15 gripper has a maximum stroke of 150mm that can handle multiple processes, and the three-finger design with a 15kg (33lb) payload provides a secure, stable grip for both form fit (internal) or friction fit (external) gripping, adding flexibility to any implementation. The gripper’s design, specially developed for machine tending tasks, automatically centers workpieces, resulting in a secure, stable grip and precise placement in machine chucks. With a gripping force from 10 N to 240 N, the 3FG15 competes with less flexible finger grippers. The gripper is also ideal for packaging and palletizing applications and is seamlessly compatible with any major collaborative or light industrial robot arm through OnRobot’s new One System Solution, the platform that provides a unified mechanical and electrical interface between the robot arms and any OnRobot EOAT. The OnRobot product range features solutions of tools for collaborative applications, including electric grippers, force/torque sensors, a vacuum gripper, the award-winning Gecko Gripper, and tool changers. This new combination of offerings from OnRobot makes it quicker and simpler to automate tasks such as packaging, quality control, materials handling, machine tending, palletizing, assembly, and surface finishing. Headquartered in Odense, Denmark, OnRobot also has offices in Dallas, Soest (Germany), Barcelona, Warsaw, Shanghai, Tokyo, Seoul, Singapore and Budapest. 3FG15 Features The 3FG15 gripper includes the following features: Precise, stable grip with automatic centering Large 150mm stroke for parts ranging from 20mm to 150mm Form fit (internal) and friction fit (external) gripping 15kg payload Weight: 1.15kg; gripping force: 10-240 N Fast, flexible deployment